!SLIDE cover

h1. <span style="font-family:'Bitstream Vera Serif', serif;font-size:80%"><span style="color:#a40800">Ruby on Rails</span> Course <span style="color:#8B8B8B">2009</span></span>

h2. Ruby: Classes

!SLIDE definition

h1. Class Definition

@@@ ruby
class SomeClass
  def some_method
  end
end
@@@

!SLIDE variables

h1. Instance Variables

@@@ ruby
class Person
  @name = "Bob"

  def greet
    "Welcome " + @name + "!"
  end

  def change_to_fred
    @name = "Fred"
  end
end
@@@

!SLIDE usage

h1. Usage

@@@ ruby
person = Person.new
puts person.greet # => "Welcome Bob!"
person.change_to_fred
puts person.greet # => "Welcome Fred!"
@@@

!SLIDE instantiation

h1. Instantiation

* The **.initialize** method is called when a new instance is created.
* Parameters passed to **.new** will be passed to the **.initialize** method.

@@@ ruby
class Person
  def initialize(name)
    @name = name
  end
end

person = Person.new("Joe")
@@@

!SLIDE access

h1. Accessing Instance Variables

@@@ ruby
class Person
  def name
    @name
  end

  def name=(name)
    @name = name
  end
end
@@@

!SLIDE attraccessor

h1. Attribute Accessors

The previous example could have been written like this:

@@@ ruby
class Person
  attr_accessor :name
end
@@@

!SLIDE accessors

* *attr_accessor* will give you get/set functionality
* *attr_reader* getter only
* *attr_writer* setter only

!SLIDE inheritance

h1. Inheritance

* Methods and variables can be inherited from another class.
* No multiple inheritance!

@@@ ruby
class Person
  attr_accessor :name
end

class Employee < Person
  attr_accessor :position
end
@@@

!SLIDE accesscontrol

h1. Access Control

h2. Default:

* *public* methods are accessible by anyone

h2.  Others:

* *protected* methods are accessible also to child objects
* *private* methods are accessible only to the class that defines them

!SLIDE accesscontrolexamples

h2. Example

@@@ ruby
class Person
  def name
    @name
  end

  protected
    def name=(name)
      @name = name
    end

  private
    def change_to_bob
      @name = "Bob"
    end
end
@@@
