!SLIDE cover

h1.  <span style="font-family:'Bitstream Vera Serif', serif;font-size:80%"><span style="color:#a40800">Ruby on Rails</span> Course <span style="color:#8B8B8B">2009</span></span>

h2. Ruby: Conditionals and Flow Control

!SLIDE if

h1. if ... elsif ... else

@@@ ruby
a = 3
if a == 4
  a = 7
elsif a < 0
  a = 0
else
  a = 5
end
print a # => 5
@@@

!SLIDE shortif

h1. Short If

When you need a single if statement and the block has only one line of code.

@@@ ruby
a = 5
a = 7 if a == 4
print a # => 5
@@@

!SLIDE unless

h1. Unless

* The **opposite of if** (executed when false)
* More expressive than an if statement with a negated variable

@@@ ruby
my_city = "Helsinki"
unless my_city == "Helsinki"
  print "I don't live in Helsinki"
end
@@@

or 

@@@ ruby
my_city = "Helsinki"
print "I don't live in Helsinki" unless my_city == "Helsinki"
@@@

!SLIDE case

h1. Case

@@@ ruby
case n
when 0 
  puts 'You typed zero'
when 1, 9 
  puts 'n is a perfect square'
when 2 
  puts 'n is a prime number'
  puts 'n is an even number'
when 3, 5, 7 
  puts 'n is a prime number'
when 4, 6, 8 
  puts 'n is an even number'
else              
  puts 'Only single-digit numbers are allowed'
end
@@@

!SLIDE ternary

h1. Ternary Operator

Instead of:

@@@ ruby
customer = "Bob"
if customer == "Bob"
  puts "Hello Bob!"
else
  puts "You're not Bob!"
end
@@@

You can have:

@@@ ruby
customer = "Bob"
puts customer == "Bob" ? "Hello Bob!" : "You're not Bob!"
@@@

!SLIDE while

h1. While

@@@ ruby
while <expression>
  <...code block...>
end
@@@

The code block will be executed again and again, as long as the expression evaluates to **true**.

!SLIDE until

h1. Until

Unlike the while statement, the code block for the until loop will execute as long as the expression evaluates to false.

@@@ ruby
until <expression>
  <...code block...>
end
@@@

!SLIDE for

h1. For

@@@ ruby
for article in articles do
  puts article.title
end
@@@

!SLIDE times

h1. Times

@@@ ruby
# Display 'Hello' 10 times
10.times do
  puts "Hello"
end

# Display powers of two
10.times do |i|
  puts 2**i
end
@@@

!SLIDE return

h1. Return

Causes the method in which it appears to exit at that point and return the value specified. Just calling return without supplying an argument will return nil.
